---
title: My journey into data science
author: Benjamin R. Jack
layout: post
---

I started my first data science job about 8 months ago. This post is a reflection on how I went from a PhD program in Cell and Molecular Biology to an industry data scientist. I don't aim to offer any explicit advice, but I hope that my story is helpful for other graduate students interested in transitioning from academia into data science.

### What's a data scientist?

I remember first hearing the term 'data science' around 2015. At the time, I was finishing my first year of graduate school at UT Austin. I had just joined Claus Wilke's lab, and one of my new labmates told me about a program called Insight Data Science. Insight takes newly-minted PhDs and trains them to be data scientists. They define a data scientist as 'better at programming than a typical statistician, and better at statistics than a typical programmer' and this is the definition that stuck with me. I never went through the Insight program, but data science suddenly appeared on my radar as a mysterious, highly in-demand 'alt-academic' career path. ('Alt-academic' is an unfortunate and common term within academia --- it refers to any career track other than becoming a professor. These days, the vast majority of new PhDs do not become professors.)

A year earlier, in 2014, Forbes declared Data Scientist the 'sexiest job of the 21st century.' The very first job posting to use the term appeared sometime in 2008. In 2008, I was a freshman at the University of Miami with no major declared. I would eventually graduate with a degree in biochemistry in 2012 and go on to work for the American Red Cross Biomedical Services Division in my hometown of Philadelphia. There I gained an appreciation for how data-driven the field of molecular biology had become. I decided that I'd go to graduate school to study some combination of biology and computer science. My only explicit goal was to do something more interesting than my lab tech position at the Red Cross.

If you ask data scientists who are former academics to define data science, they'll likely tell you that data science is just science. Scientific research has always involved analyzing data, and it has always required statistical skills. More recently, as the volume of data generated by the broader scientific enterprise increases, it also requires programming. This was true of my area of specialization, computational biology. I learned how to manage large data sets, work on a super computing cluster, clean data from protein databases, visualize data, and build all sorts of statistical models. I had, almost by accident, acquired most of the core skills that a data scientist needs. This is part of why you see so many data scientists with PhDs. It's not that you _need_ a PhD to be a data scientist, its that the process of doing original research during a PhD program fosters the development of data science skills.

### Building a data science skill set

By late 2015 or early 2016, I had decided that I was unlikely to stay in academia. So, I set out to position myself for a career in data science. At first, this was just attending meet-ups and trying to talk to as many people in the industry as possible. UT hosted a few panel discussions with data scientists. At the time, you actually didn't need to know machine learning to be a data scientist. It was obvious from conversations with friends in the industry, though, that machine learning was increasingly become a standard job requirement for most data science positions. This was an area where I knew I lacked experience. By 2017, I had decided to take two online courses through edX and Coursera. The first, and probably best machine learning course I've taken, was Stanford's Learning from the Data. Its definitely more heavy on theory than most machine learning courses, but provides a strong foundation on which to learn new machine learning techniques as they appear. The second course I took (or really set of courses) were Andrew Ng's Coursera specialization in deep learning.

By late 2017, 3 years into my PhD program, I started to look more seriously at data science job positions. I went to the UT Science and Technology career fair, resume in hand, looking for internship positions. The handful of employers hiring data scientists told me that I did not have the applied experience they were looking for --- even for an internship. This was incredibly disheartening. At the time I had several papers published in academic journals. This was real, applied scientific research. Yet, the only concrete feedback that I recieved from any recruiters was that they were looking for applied deep learning experience. The courses I took were helpful, but they needed to see examples of those skills in real projects. Notably, my thesis projects included statistical modeling, but not deep learning.

### A meandering path to a data science internship

To gain applied deep learning experience, I started looking into kaggle competitions. Most computer vision competitions -- the ones that almost exclusively require deep learning -- are won by data scientists with specialized hardware, or at least access to specialized hardware resources. Specifically, training deep learning models is order of magnitudes faster on an nvidia GPU. There are a few ways to get access to these GPUs, including all of the major cloud providors. I decided to take the more difficult route, which is to build your own PC specifically for deep learning. After scouring the internet for blog posts and a lot of help from the reddit community, I purchased all of the parts for my own deep learning box. Total cost: $1200. 

Building a $1200 PC is a significant investment for a graduate student. Within months, however, it paid of handsomely. I would easily describe building that PC as the best investment I've ever made in my data science career, but probably not for the reasons you think. I toiled away at a Whale Identification kaggle competition for a few weeks, and never actually submitted a model. At SXSW 2018, a friend convinced me to attend the SXSW Start-Up Crawl, a networking event where attendees travel to several locations across Austin to meet representatives of start-ups. At the start-up crawl, the Valkyrie Intelligence team was demonstrating the Mark1, their new custom-built deep learning server. Having just built my own PC specifically for deep learning, I had a great conversation with Valkyrie founder Charlie Burgoyne about the unique hardware requirements for training and deploying deep learning models. I asked Charlie if we could meet for lunch to discuss careers in data science.

A few weeks later, I met Charlie for lunch at an italian restaurant in downtown Austin. Over chicken parm sandwiches, we discussed the state of the data science industry as a whole. I learned about data science consulting. We discussed the difference between data science generalists and specialists and how the role of a data scientists would eveolve in the future. We talked about the value of bring data-driven, empirical thinking to business problems. We also, of course, discussed my background and interests. I eventually asked if Valkyrie would be open to taking on interns. The short answer was yes.

After a few interviews with other members of the Valkyrie team, I was hired as a paid intern in May of 2018. I would work for Valkyrie part time while I wrapped up my dissertation work. The interview process did not include a technical interview, at least in the conventional sense of take-home projects or whiteboarding or other coding challenges. We certainly discussed my background and some of the more technical aspects of my research, but at the time Valkyrie did not include coding challenges as part of the hiring process for interns. I've heard many stories about the grueling technical interview process to work at FAANGs, but I don't think that's the case for most data science positions.

After three months interning at Valkyrie and my first client project wrapping up, I was offered a full-time position as a Senior Scientist starting in January 2019, just after my expected December graduation. Six months later, at my first mid-year performance review, I was promoted to Principal Scientist.

### All the things that didn't work

It's easy to spin a cohesive narrative about my journey from graduate student to data scientist in retrospect. At this point in the story, however, I've left out a whole lot of details about all of the things that I tried that did not obviously advance my career prospects. At many points I felt lost, overwhelmed, and helpless. I felt like I was running ten directions at once, having no idea what would 'stick'. Here are some of those directions.

#### Networking events

I went to many, many data science meet-ups and networking events. At all of these events, I met a lot of people, and heard a lot conflicting opinions on what it took to land a job in data science. As an introvert, these events were also exhausting. Of the many events I attended, the only one that directly led to an internship offer was the SXSW Start-Up Crawl.

#### Job fairs

I went to one job fair during my job hunt. I talked to many companies who had data science teams, but couldn't really tell me what they did or what the qualifications were. Some reps told me that most applicants they see for data science positions don't have the program skills they're looking for, others told me that they don't have the statistical modeling skills or business skills. Sometimes two representatives within the same company would give conflicting advice on whether or not I was qualified for a data science position. I would like to think that the advice to develop real-world deep learning experience was helpful, except that I managed to get an internship without ever gaining that experience (I never actually entered any kaggle compeititons). Not to mention that deep learning just isn't used as frequently in data science as the blog-o-sphere and job postings would have you believe.

#### Blogging

I created this blog under the vague notion that in order to get a job in today's economy, you need to develop your personal brand. I was later told by numerous data science twitter personalities that they best way to demonstrate your data science skills is to blog about them. Well, since you can see that I posted at most 1-2 times a year and never discussed an specific data science side projects, I can't say that having this blog improved my career prospects. I do think that blogging about side projects is an excellent way to demonstrate your skills, its just not the path that I took.

### Advice for job seekers

Looking back at my experiences, I'm not sure that I have any broadly applicable advice. I still think that I got incredibly lucky at several points on my career development path. I happened to join the laboratory of Claus Wilke, who later became a minor data science Twitter celebrity and published a book on data visualization. I decided to build a PC for deep learning just weeks before, by chance, I met Charlie and the Valkyrie team who had also been building their own deep learning hardware. 

What I did learn from this adventure, though, is the incredible value of networking. The unfortunate truth of the data science job market, at least from my perspective, is that companies hire people they know. This is especially true of small companies who don't have the resources to conduct a broad job market search for new candidates. And of course, this is true of many industries outside of data science. For technically-minded introverts, networking events can be tiring. But my advice to them is to go anyway. Networking is a skill that you can develop.

Once you're in the industry, networking becomes even more valuable. I now recieve informal job offers at meet-up events, and I have candidates come to me asking about positions at Valkyrie. I don't have any intention to leave Valkyrie now, but my options are wide open mostly thanks to networking.

### Further reading

I'm not the first to write about landing a job in data science. Here are some other great resources.

* [Data science is different now](https://veekaybee.github.io/2019/02/13/data-science-is-different/) by Vicki Boykis
* [One year of deep learning](https://www.fast.ai/2019/01/02/one-year-of-deep-learning/) by Sylvain Gugger
* [Some reflections on being turned down for a lot of data science jobs](https://tdhopper.com/blog/some-reflections-on-being-turned-down-for-a-lot-of-data-science-jobs/) by Tim Hopper
* [Advice for applying to data science jobs](https://hookedondata.org/advice-for-applying-to-data-science-jobs/) by Emily Robinson




